Long-Range Interactions in Natural Scene Processing Revealed by
Voltage-Sensitive Dye Imaging Across Primary Visual Cortex.

Selim Onat1, Peter König1, Dirk Jancke2

1 Institute of Cognitive Science, Department of Neurobiopsychology,
University Osnabrück, 49069, Osnabrück, Germany

2 Cognitive Neurobiology, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44780, Bochum, Germany

Summary

Long-range interactions in visual cortex supposedly embed statistical
knowledge about the environment and influence processing of local visual
features. Are integrative mechanisms, as demonstrated with simplified
stimuli, effective under natural conditions? Here, using VSDI  to capture
population dynamics across several square millimeters of cortex in cat area
18, we first demonstrate qualitative differences in the cortical processing
regime of natural stimuli and drifting gratings. Next, by presenting
natural movies through either one or two adjacent apertures, we show that
simultaneous presentation leads to mutual facilitation of activity. The
effect is strongest when movie patches originate from the same original
movie, thus forming a coherent stimulus in which the inherent
spatio-temporal structure of natural movies is preserved. These results
suggest that as early as in primary visual cortex, natural stimuli unfold
cooperative processing mechanisms that are imprinted into the cortical
functional architecture.

Introduction

Results

We performed voltage-sensitive dye imaging (VSDI) and multi-unit recordings
in cortical area 18 of anesthetized cats. As visual stimuli we used
drifting gratings and natural movies. The former have been extensively used
over the past decades in many electrophysiological and imaging experiments
and allow a well-founded comparison to activity patterns evoked by natural
stimuli. The latter were captured for the present purpose by cats freely
exploring a natural habitat (Figure 1A). In the full-field condition, both
kinds of stimuli were presented, subtending a large part of the visual
field (~40°_30°). To investigate the impact of long-range cortical
interactions, natural movies were also locally presented, through either a
single or a pair of Gaussian apertures (3-4°, Figure 1B, see also
Supplementary Movie S1).

The operating mode of cortical processing is different for natural stimuli

	We began our analysis with a comparison of the activation patterns
	evoked by drifting gratings and full-field natural scene movies.
	Natural scenes produced a stimulus-dependent response within the first
	100 ms after stimulus onset (Figure 2A first and second rows and Figure
	2B red/blue traces). Subsequent activity exhibited dynamic modulations
	such as the emergence and spatial propagation of activity intermingled
	with the appearance of large regions of low activity (see also
	Supplemental Movie S2). In contrast, for gratings,
	orientation-selective activity appeared in form of complementary
	ripple-like activity patterns (Figure 2A third and fourth rows and
	Figure 2B black/gray traces), along with a strong orientation
	unspecific excitation distributed widely across the imaged area. This
	pattern increased until around 300 ms, and then constantly decayed.
	Average activity maps (Figure 2A, rightmost column) show that
	stimulation by two orthogonal gratings reveals the columnar structure
	of complementary orientation domains (Hubel and Wiesel 1974; Grinvald
	et al., 1986). For natural movie conditions the average activity
	integrated over the entire length of stimulus presentation did not
	exhibit any readily identifiable blob-like structure even though strong
	spatial patterns were observed in individual frames. Overall, the mean
	amplitudes generated by natural stimuli were consistently lower as
	compared to gratings (Figure 2B, right panel). This observation was
	also confirmed by multi-unit recordings, which showed lower firing
	rates for natural stimuli compared to gratings (Figure 2C, right
	panel).

	As a next step, we compared the synaptic activity levels reported by
	the dye signal and multiunit spiking activities across the whole set of
	experiments (n=11). In 9 out of 11 experiments, gratings elicited
	stronger optical responses than natural stimuli (Figure 3A). In the
	grating condition, the dye signal was increased by up to 58% and the
	median increase (over experiments) was 30% (Wilcoxon signed-rank test,
	p=6.83_10-3). Analyzing the spike data in the same manner we observed a
	median increase of 48% in spike counts. Next, we compared these
	relative differences across the two recording methods. We did not find
	a significant difference in the increases seen in dye signal and spike
	counts (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p=0.19). Taken together, these
	results show that grating stimuli lead to considerably higher activity
	levels than natural movies.

Gratings push nonspecific response component

	Could these higher activity levels under grating conditions result from
	orientation-specific activation, or would it rather be attributable to
	unspecific response components? Examples of single condition
	orientation maps computed by temporally averaging the dye signal are
	shown in Figure 3B. To answer the question, we created two sets of
	non-overlapping pixels with orthogonal orientation preference by
	selecting the highest activated 10th percentile of the pixels from the
	horizontal and vertical single condition maps (Figure 3B, rightmost
	panel). We then evaluated the activity levels of these pixels during
	their preferred and orthogonal grating conditions and compared these to
	the activity during natural conditions.

The average activity levels of pixels during stimulation with gratings of
non-preferred orientation was .82_10-3 ∆F/F which gives us an estimate of
the orientation-unspecific component. Comparing the activity during
stimulation with the preferred grating orientation, we found an increase of
25%, corresponding to a value of 1.03_10-3 ∆F/F. The resulting modulation
depth across all experiments (n=11) is summarized in Figure 3C (black vs.
gray bars). The average activity levels reached for the preferred
orientation were 1.06_10-3 ± .078_10-3 (SEM), compared to .88_10-3 ±
.07_10-3 for non-preferred. Thus, the dynamic range of cortical activity
encoding the information about stimulus orientation corresponds to the top
~20% of overall activation in accord with Sharon and Grinvald (2002).

For natural stimuli, an average activity level across both sets of pixels
was .8_10-3 ∆F/F (Figure 3C, green bar, left plot). This corresponds to 84%
of the activity generated by neurons stimulated with a grating of preferred
orientation (compare green and black bars in Figure 3C). Importantly, this
value was also smaller than the activity obtained in response to the
non-preferred grating (compare green and gray bars in Figure 3C) meaning
that even sub-optimally activated regions were more active when compared to
activity yielded by natural stimulation. Therefore, by using average
activity levels to derive single conditions maps, we conclude that the
higher levels of activity observed with gratings are a consequence of an
overall increase in the level of activity.

The natural movie dynamics induce considerable modulations of activity over
the entire course of presentation. We next ensured that these modulations
did not influence the previous analysis. We repeated the same analysis this
time based on single condition maps representing the peak activity reached
during the course of the stimulus presentation. Even though these values
are more prone to outliers, they provide a more robust comparison of
activity levels across these different stimulation conditions. We found
that peak activities for the non-preferred orientation remained higher than
the maximal values recorded during natural conditions (Figure 3D). This
confirms that the comparatively higher activity levels observed in the
grating conditions were not a result of the temporal modulations
encountered during stimulation with natural movies. Rather, this boost in
activity for grating stimuli results from a general, strong activation of
the visual cortex and cannot be solely attributable to strongly activated
neuronal populations receiving their preferred input. 

Temporal population dynamics evoked by natural movies

	VSDI resolves the temporal dynamics of population activity within a
	millisecond range and thus forms a suitable tool for the analysis of
	temporal aspects (Grinvald and Hildesheim, 2004). We now focus on the
	time courses of activity averaged across the imaged area (Figure 4A).
	In response to gratings (black curve), the dye signal increased steeply
	and peaked at around 300 ms. Noticeably, there was an early slowdown in
	activity occurring at around 100 ms (see explanation below). After the
	peak was reached, the dye signal decayed slowly. In contrast, responses
	to natural movies lacked a readily identifiable peak and decay
	component, but instead displayed modulations over the entire observed
	time course (compare Figure 2). Thus time courses differed in both the
	scale of the initial activation and their global characteristics.

To quantify the global characteristics, we analyzed the spectral properties
of the time-courses. As averaging across trials was done before the
spectral estimation, this analysis highlights the signals locked to the
stimulus and discards the induced activity that does not have a consistent
phase relationship to the stimulus. For each experiment, we took the ratio
of estimated power spectra obtained from natural and grating conditions.
The median ratio was characterized by up to 10 times more power within the
frequency interval of 1 to 10 Hz (Figure 4B). The only portion of the
responses in which spectral power for gratings was found to be enhanced was
within the frequency range of 0-1 Hz. This shows that the cortical activity
during the presentation of natural movies is best characterized by rich
fluctuations, whereas grating stimuli yield a monotonously adapting
activity profile.

We computed the degree to which the observed fluctuations are caused by the
velocity profiles present in the movies (Figure 4C, left and middle
panels). For each movie, we computed the amplitude of the flow-field vector
representing the net motion between consecutive frames independent of its
direction (dotted line), and compared it with the time course of evoked
cortical activity (solid line). The similarity between the flow field and
global time-course were apparent (Figure 4C, left and middle panels, see
also Supplemental Movie S2). To quantify this relation we computed the
correlation coefficients for different lags of time (Figure 4C, right
panel). The cross-correlogram peaked at about 110 ms and reached values up
to 0.6. We thus conclude that a considerable part of the variance present
in the global time-course was explained by the velocity profile of natural
movies.

The initial increase of the dye signal immediately after stimulus onset is
followed by a subsequent slowdown, which occurs over a short period of time
(Figure 4A, shown by an arrow). This notch has been referred to as the
deceleration-acceleration (DA) notch in VSDI experiments exploring the
cortical dynamics evoked by gratings (Sharon and Grinvald, 2002). It is
thought to result from the establishment of inhibition within the cortical
circuit following the initial excitatory input. In all experiments except
one we observed a notch occurring approximately 100 ms after stimulus onset
(four examples are shown in Figure 4D). To compare the DA notches evoked by
gratings and natural stimuli, we closely inspected the global time courses
of activity between 50 and 200 ms. As the exact time point of the notch in
different experiments varied, we detected the zero-crossing of the second
derivative of the dye signal (Figure 4D, red circles in right four panels)
and aligned all experiments to these offsets prior to averaging (Figure 4D,
left). The initial deceleration followed by acceleration was evident in the
time courses depicting responses to gratings (black curve). A strikingly
similar deceleration of activity also occurred in responses to natural
stimuli. In contrast, the latter acceleration component was much weaker or
even absent for natural movies (green curve). Based on these observations,
it is conceivable that grating stimuli provide a powerful excitatory input
to cortex even following the establishment of inhibition. In contrast, the
system processes natural scenes in a more balanced regime of excitation and
inhibition.

	As a consequence of this pronounced acceleration during grating
	stimulation, activation levels peaked at high values. To quantify
	thisacross all experiments, we compared average activity within the
	175-425 ms time window including response peaks. We found that peak
	activity levels were 55% higher than the overall mean, compared to only
	19% in the case of natural conditions. Interestingly, following this
	initial boost in activity, grating time-courses exhibited a strong
	adaptational profile. The slope of the best fitting line to the
	stationary part (the interval between 0.4s and 2s) was in all cases
	more negative, thus decaying faster, for the grating conditions (Figure
	4E, inset). The median slopes were -0.58_10-3 and -0.32_10-3 ∆F/F/s for
	gratings and natural movies, respectively. In order to obtain a
	representative time-course for natural and grating conditions, we
	averaged the activity time-courses across experiments. Systematic
	differences are well illustrated in these "characteristic activity
	profiles" (Figure 4E) where the pronounced decay in activity following
	the remarkable initial overshoot is clearly visible. Due to the more
	stable time-course during natural conditions, we observed a crossover
	of these global activity time-courses at around 1.5 seconds. These
	results support the view that the two classes of stimuli are processed
	under different regimes. The processing of gratings is realized in an
	operating mode where forceful excitation is followed by an equally
	strong adapational decay. On the other hand, the absence of strong
	excitatory drive shows that natural stimuli are seemingly processed
	within a mode where the balance between excitation and inhibition
	dominates.

Locally presented natural movies evoke localized dynamic activity patterns

	In order to investigate long-range cortical interactions under natural
	dynamic stimulation conditions, movies were also presented locally by
	applying either one or two Gaussian masks. For each experiment, a total
	of 8 local stimulation conditions were created (Figure 1B, see also
	Supplemental Movie S1). Using two positions (positions A and B) and two
	natural movies (movie 1 and 2), single (conditions A1, B1, A2 and B2),
	coherent (conditions A1B1 and A2B2) and incoherent (conditions A1B2 and
	A2B1) conditions were constructed. During stimulation with these
	localized stimuli, we observed evoked activity in 7 out of 11
	experiments, which were included in the following analysis. 

	Prior to optical recordings, the topographic mapping between the
	cortical surface and the visual field were scrutinized by means of
	several electrode penetrations (Figure 5B: penetration sites and
	corresponding receptive fields  are color coded). Stimuli were
	positioned so that the upper movie patch matched the receptive field
	position of the simultaneously recorded multiunit activity (Figure 5B,
	red circle and rectangle). This ensured that the distance between the
	Gaussian masks were separated beyond the size of classical receptive
	fields. Indeed for the experiment shown (Figure 5A), spike counts
	exceeded baseline level exclusively during the conditions where the top
	patch of movie was presented. 

	Upon localized stimulation by natural movie patches, activity emerged
	from baseline level with variable delays among conditions (Figure 5
	shows responses to two different movies: movie one, rows 1-3; movie
	two, rows 4-6). The cortical responses were located along the cortical
	antero-posterior axis, reflecting the vertical positioning of the movie
	patches in the visual field. The localized stimuli gave rise to
	different spatial extents and peak values of cortical activation at
	different frames (see also Supplemental Movie S3). Across the time
	averaged maps (Figure 5, second column from right), spatially localized
	spots of activity with approximately centrally located peak values were
	clearly visible. These spot-like activation patterns observed during
	localized presentation allowed us to disambiguate the contributions of
	subcortical input from those of other sources. We were thus able to
	choose non-overlapping regions of interests (ROI) that were
	specifically driven by individual movie patches presented at the two
	different locations. The direct input to these ROIs was  the same under
	coherent and single patch conditions, thus any differences in activity
	can be attributed to impact of long-range cortical interactions. By
	selecting the most active pixels corresponding to the highest
	percentiles during single patch conditions (A1, B1, A2 and B2), we
	chose two pairs of different ROIs (one pair for each movie) per
	experiment (Figure 5, rightmost column). This yielded 28 ROIs for
	comparison (local set). Occasionally we focused on a subset of 19
	comparisons corresponding to the ROIs with the strongest responses to
	the stimuli (selected local set). In the following, the latencies and
	activity levels within these selected regions of interest will be
	compared across conditions to identify contextual interactions.

Long-range cortical connections reduce response time

	We investigated the extent to which contextual stimulation reduced the
	time required for neuronal populations to reach a significant
	activation level. We defined this as the time it took for a recorded
	pixel to exceed two standard deviations of baseline in two consecutive
	frames, and visualized these values topographically using latency maps
	(see Figure 6A, left and middle columns for examples). In the case of
	single conditions (left column), latency maps exhibited a localized
	circular spot embedded in a background that did not reach significant
	activation levels (black pixels). We also found a common tendency for
	the fastest reacting pixels to be centrally located, with an increase
	in latencies towards the periphery. To quantify the effect of
	contextual modulation on response times, changes in latency due to the
	additional movie patch were evaluated within a given ROI. To avoid
	problems with determining latencies of weak responses, the analysis was
	carried on the selected local set. 

	Within the highest percentile of activation (Figure 6A, red pixels in
	the right panel correspond to the 5th percentile) latencies exhibited a
	large variability, ranging between 100 and 700 ms (Figure 6B). The mean
	latency decreased in the presence of an additional distant movie patch,
	with 76% of cases displaying shorter latencies. The average latencies
	were about 340 ms and 268 ms for single and coherent conditions,
	respectively (t-test, p<0.05). Furthermore, we found that the effect on
	latencies increased approximately linearly with decreasing activity
	percentiles (Figure 6C). For the least active pixels, corresponding to
	the interval of 75-80 percent, the average change in latency was about
	140 ms. This was twice the size of the effect found for pixels
	belonging to the highest percentile interval. Hence we conclude that
	the presence of a contextual natural stimulus reduced the response
	times of distant neurons to their direct subcortical input. Furthermore
	the least activated pixels benefited most from this effect.

Lateral connections exert facilitatory influences under natural conditions

We next evaluated the effect of contextual movies on activity levels. The
time course of activity within the pixels corresponding to the highest 5th
percentile is shown for the example experiment introduced previously
(Figure 7A). The evolution of activity during the local presentation of two
different movies (1st and 2nd rows) at two different cortical positions
(left and right columns) is depicted. Note the similarity in temporal
structure within each row and the pronounced differences across different
rows. This points to the fact that each movie has a specific impact on the
recorded cortical region. The effect of contextual movies can be
appreciated by comparing dashed and solid curves within each plot. The
activity evoked by the same input was similar in the presence or absence of
the second movie patch. However, higher activity levels for coherent
conditions were consistently observed during the first half of stimulus
presentation (black lines). Altogether this suggests that the direct input
dominates the dynamics, while long-range interactions lead to facilitation
upon presentation of contextual information.

To test whether this reasoning holds for the entire dataset, we took the
median of differences across all 28 comparisons (solid black curve in
Figure 7B). We found that the facilitatory effect started to evolve briefly
after stimulus onset, reached significance after 500 ms (Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, p < 0.05), and remained effective for the next 400 ms.
Across all experiments average activities over this first 900 ms of
stimulus presentation time spanned a wide range, starting from no activity
to values reaching .4_10-3 ∆F/F (Figure 7C). In 68% of comparisons,
coherent stimulation yielded a higher level of activity compared to single
conditions (Figure 7C). To test how this facilitation depended on the
efficacy of the movies in driving cortical activity, we restricted the same
analysis to the selected local set (19 comparisons, depicted by filled
squares in Figure 7C). In the remaining 9 cases, activity was very low, and
did not exceed .2_10-3 ∆F/F within the pixels corresponding to the highest
5th percentile across all local conditions during the whole period of
presentation. Within the selected local set, the activity during coherent
stimulation was greater in 88% of the cases and the facilitatory effect
reached significance as early as 200 ms (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon signed-rank
test), with a peak at around 600 ms before vanishing at approximately 900
ms (Figure 7D, solid black curve). Our results so far have provided
evidence that upon context, long-range interactions within early visual
cortex are operational under natural stimulus conditions, and allow for
enhanced activity levels and shorter onset latencies in the presence of
contextual input. 

Facilitatory effects are sensitive to the spatio-temporal coherence of the
stimulus

In how far does the observed facilitation depend on the specific
spatio-temporal properties inherent to the natural movies? As the movies
were recorded from the viewpoint of freely moving cats, each natural movie
had a distinctive flow field profile. Furthermore, motion was widely
distributed across the visual field. During coherent conditions the same
original natural movie was presented through both of the Gaussian
apertures, and consequently the spatio-temporal characteristics of the
natural movie were left intact. In contrast, in the case of incoherent
conditions, movie patches stemmed from different natural movies, leading to
an evident dissonance due to the elimination of naturally occurring
correlations between apertures (see Supplemental Movie S1). The total input
received by cortical neurons was identical across the sum of coherent and
incoherent conditions (A1B1+A2B2=A1B2+A2B1), and therefore any difference
encountered in activity levels found in this comparison can be attributed
to contextual facilitatory effects arising from the spatio-temporal
coherence of the stimulus.

As facilitation was prominent during the early phase of stimulus
presentation, we here focused on the first 900 ms. Figure 8A shows average
activity maps evoked by coherent (left) and incoherent (right) stimulation
for two different experiments. As can be seen, the local movie patches
evoked stronger and more spatially extended responses when the inherent
spatio-temporal statistical properties of the natural movies were left
intact. To quantify the differences in activity levels across all
experiments we again compared average activity within those pixels that
were most active (local set). The location of these pixels corresponded to
the peak position observed during coherent and incoherent conditions thus
yielded two regions of interests to be compared per experiment. The average
activity was in most cases higher for coherent conditions. This finding was
consistent across the majority of experiments (Figure 8B), with 71% of
experiments revealing higher activation levels for coherent conditions
(Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p<0.05). We thus conclude that the facilitatory
effects are stronger when the provided context is coherent with respect to
the spatio-temporal characteristics of the remote stimulation.



Discussion

We used VSDI as a tool to investigate the activation dynamics of visual
cortical neurons at a large-scale population level. We found qualitative
and quantitative differences in spatio-temporal response signatures to
complex natural versus simple grating stimuli. Strong excitation followed
by a sustained adaptation was a prevailing characteristic during the
processing of gratings that drifted with constant velocity. In contrast,
activity evoked by dynamic natural input did not reach the activation
levels measured for gratings, and furthermore exhibited continued
modulations. These results suggest a processing regime for natural stimuli
in which excitation and inhibition are balanced. In addition to these
findings, our study contributes to the long-lasting debate about contextual
modulations and their role in "non-classical" receptive field behavior, a
topic only scarcely investigated under natural stimulus conditions. We show
that across several millimeters of cortex, distant neuronal populations
contribute to facilitatory long-range interactions that are effective
within hundreds of milliseconds. An important attribute of these
interactions was their sensitivity to the spatio-temporal coherence within
natural movies. Furthermore, the fact that these results were obtained in
anaesthetized preparations points to the existence of automatic cortical
processes operating in the absence of attentional factors.

The choice of stimuli

The choice of stimuli is a crucial part of any experiment, and their usage
and validity for exploring the visual system needs careful justification
(Felsen and Dan, 2005; Rust and Movshon, 2005). In recent years, much
effort has been undertaken to approximate natural conditions within the
laboratory (Kayser et al., 2004). This began with the use of a variety of
natural stimuli. Often static images of natural scenes are presented for a
fixed amount of time (Creutzfeldt and Nothdurft, 1978). Video clips
additionally include motion cues, due both to the dynamics of the world and
to ego motion. Indeed, it has been possible to characaterize cortical areas
by their response to commercial videos (Hasson et al., 2004) and to
determine the visual stimulus out of a large set of images based on the
decoding of cortical responses (Kay et al., 2008). Furthermore, the
complexities of natural stimuli further lead to the development of new
analysis methods (Spiers and Maguire, 2007). The extent to which visual
stimuli can be considered natural in different species, e.g. videos taken
from a human vantage point used in investigation of cat visual cortex, is
also an issue of current research (Einhäuser et al., in press). An
intermediate option is to simulate eye-movements on static images (Vinje
and Gallant, 2000). This results in more realistic retinal stimulation
without concomitant motor signals.

	Anesthesia obviously has a major influence on mental state and brain
	activity. Recording neuronal activity in monkey cortex is most often
	performed in complex tasks requiring an alert animal. The majority of
	experiments on early sensory processing in cats have been performed in
	the anaesthetized preparation (Hubel and Wiesel, 1998). In recent years
	with a fascinating technical development it has been achieved to record
	neuronal activity in awake animals using an increasing variety of
	techniques (Denk and Kerr, 2008, Houweling and Brecht, 2008). Over and
	beyond this aspect anesthesia abolishes natural patterns of
	eye-movements and hence has additional indirect influences on sensory
	processing (Maldonado and Babul, 2007). In the alert animal the quick
	sequence of eye-movements places attention on the fast dynamics of
	neuronal activity (Maldonado et al. 2008). Summarizing, depending on
	the objective of the study different roads to natural conditions might
	be optimal. Here we used movies recorded by cats and therefore the
	motion of the camera is tightly related to the animal's motion. As our
	focus was on early cortical sensory processing without the active
	component, we consider the usage of natural videos recorded from the
	viewpoint of the animal a step towards "natural conditions".

One of the major difficulties faced during investigation of visual system
under natural conditions, is that, beyond formalizations of second-order
correlations (Field 1987, Ruderman & Bialek 1994; van der Schaaf & van
Hateren 1996 Torralba & Oliva 2003; Betsch et al. 2004), we lack knowledge
about their high-order properties and are consequently unable to provide a
clear parameterized description of these stimuli. In contrast, traditional
laboratory stimuli such as gratings offer complete control of the input,
and there is no doubt that this aspect has considerably fostered their use.
However, a major, implicit assumption within this latter paradigm is that
cortical circuitries within sensory areas are generic processors, that is,
they process all inputs according to the same regime, regardless of the
characteristics of the signal and of the specific embodiment of cortical
circuitries. Given that natural stimuli form only a marginal subset of all
possible stimuli (Field, 1994), it is conceivable that cortical circuitries
are specifically adapted to process the input which is ecologically
relevant (Simoncelli and Olshasen 2001; Felsen and Dan, 2005). For example,
natural scenes contain finite auto-correlations, while oriented gratings
have infinite spatial auto-correlations. Such differences between
statistical properties of stimuli used to probe the visual system and those
encountered by the visual system under normal operating conditions might
hamper the conclusions drawn about the underlying processing principles.
Here we approached these issues using quantitative comparisons of the
cortical responses to drifting gratings and complex natural scene movies.

Cortical operating mode differences

Neurons in the early cortical areas have to solve the problem of fitting a
wide range of input signals into a limited bandwidth of spiking outputs. To
use the output bandwidth optimally, adaptive mechanisms are needed to
dynamically adjust the operating range of neurons (Brenner et al., 2000).
For V1 neurons it has been suggested that this is done by the detection of
significant deviations in the membrane potential signal which are later on
transformed into spike trains (Ringach and Malone, 2007). Such dynamic
thresholding mechanisms are thought to underlie the invariance of spiking
output with respect to the first and second order properties of the input
signal.

In the present work, using natural movies to gauge the activity levels
evoked by artificial stimuli, we have found that activity levels were
considerably higher for simple square-wave gratings. This cortical over
excitation was not simply attributable to a dominant contribution of
neurons receiving their preferred stimulus since even non-preferred
orientations evoked higher amplitudes than natural stimuli. Therefore, the
presence of "artificially" high activity levels suggests that the operating
point of the cortex is situated at a different position as compared to the
processing of ecologically relevant stimuli. Differences in operating
points however, inevitably affect the working range of the non-linearity
that transforms subthreshold activity into spikes (David et al., 2004).
Non-linear cortical mechanisms transform broadly tuned subthreshold
activity into more sharply tuned spiking output, as shown by means of
intracellular recordings (Carandini and Ferster, 2000; Monier et al., 2003;
Shapley et al., 2003 for review). Hence, orthogonal orientations produce
typically no change in baseline levels of spiking activity because
unspecific input components are filtered out. As a consequence of different
operating points, using gratings may therefore paradoxically result in
erroneous underestimation of bandwidth capacities of orientation tuning,
i.e. the overwhelming synaptic activation in response to mono-parametric
gratings may cause estimation of wider tuning curves than they actually are
during processing of oriented features in natural images.

Early Deceleration of activity introduces balanced inhibition

In support of the above findings, we observed additional differences during
the built-up of activity. The early phase of cortical responses to gratings
was characterized by a DA (deceleration-acceleration) notch in which the
initial rising signal underwent a momentarily slowing down before reaching
peak values during the subsequent acceleration stage. In a recent VSDI
study it was argued that this notch results from establishment of
inhibition within the cortical circuitry following the arrival of
excitatory inputs (Sharon and Grinvald, 2002). The subsequent deceleration
of activity is most likely caused by a strong decrease of membrane
conductance presumably mediated by shunting mechanisms occurring during the
early phases of the response (Borg-Graham et al., 1998; Hirsch et al.,
1998; Sharon and Grinvald, 2002).

Whereas stimulation with gratings caused continuously increasing activity
in which excitation prevailed, a more balanced reaction was observed after
onset of natural movies. In response to natural movies we found a similar
transient deceleration as for gratings. In contrast to gratings however,
the subsequent acceleration was either absent or much less pronounced. That
is following the excitatory input, activity was counteracted by inhibition
resulting in continued dynamic modulations of activity that only rarely
overshoot initial activation levels. These observations suggest that
cortical processing of natural movies operates in a balanced regime of
inhibition and excitation leading to the different response characteristics
upon presentation of simple and complex natural stimuli.

What are the relationships between increased effective inhibition detected
in the dye signal and earlier results that have been obtained at single
cell levels when using natural stimuli? In fact, single unit recordings
demonstrated the important role of inhibition within cortical and
subcortical circuitries. Upon stimulation with natural images, the strength
of inhibitory subregions within receptive fields of lateral geniculate
nucleus (Lesica et al., 2007) and V1 (David et al., 2004) neurons increased
significantly compared to artificial stimuli. On the same line, increasing
the size of a natural movie, such that it encompasses the modulatory
surround of the classical receptive field, leads to highly non-linear
changes in spiking behavior. The enlargement in stimulus size creates a net
suppressive effect reducing overall population activity (Vinje and Gallant,
2000; Vinje and Gallant, 2002) in line with our results obtained for movies
that covered the entire visual hemifield. Moreover, concomitant to the
modulatory suppression, natural stimuli produced increased sparseness
(Vinje & Gallant, 2000; Vinje and Gallant, 2002) and non-linear changes in
feature contrast sensitivity (Felsen et al., 2005). These observations
underline the impact of inhibition on cortical processing capacities and
suggest its functional efficacy in a balanced regime of processing within
neuronal circuits that are designed for natural input.

Activity signals stimulus motion in natural movies

Under conditions in which stimulus velocity is not constant, firing rates
and local field potentials exhibit sudden modulations (Kayser and König,
2004; de Ruyter van Steveninck et al., 1997). In such dynamic conditions
action potentials are characterized by non-poisonian statistics,
contrasting responses to stimuli of constant velocity for which activity
shows low degrees of reliability (de Ruyter van Steveninck et al., 1997).
Our replayed movies included typical head and body movements of strolling
cats and consequently they had dynamic motion profiles. The dye signal
revealed powerful modulations which were strongly correlated to the motion
dynamics of the movies. Consequently the stimulus locked activity explained
a large proportion of the variance of the evoked signal. Since the global
time courses characterize average synaptic activity of a large number of
neurons, this implies a population phenomenon affecting cortical regions of
several square millimeters.

We found that the correlation peaked at around 110 ms. Given that contrast
is an important factor in affecting latencies (Dean and Tolhurst, 1986),
these relatively long delays most likely originated from the average
luminance contrast level of the natural movies used. However, recent VSDI
experiments in cat primary visual cortex demonstrated how latency depends
on a variety of basic stimulus attributes. Transition times between
cortical representations were measured as a function of sudden changes in
spatial frequency, drift velocity, orientation, and contrast of grating
stimuli (Naaman and Grinvald, 2004[SO3]). Similar long delays as in our
study were found when the conditioning stimulus had a strong impact on the
strength of evoked activation patterns, or when the following test stimulus
produced only weak activity. These situations compare to movie sequences in
which past history evoked strong activation patterns and sudden motion
onsets introduce new snapshots without essential changes of the overall
stimulus structure. The observed, on average, longer latencies in natural
scene processing may therefore reflect switches between initially strong
attractor states that stabilize past cortical representations and delay
transition times to emergence of subsequent activation patterns in cases
where no substantial changes in stimulus properties occur.[SO4]

In opposition, gratings moving with constant velocity caused a monotonic
decline of activity, indicating a continued decoupling from stimulus
characteristics. That is, despite the fact that our gratings were presented
with constant velocity over the entire imaging epoch, activity revealed a
strong monotonous decay over time scales of seconds. The strong initial
overshoot of activity followed by drastic decrease in activity levels may
or may not be causally linked. However compared to the activity profile
evoked by dynamic natural movies, it shows that gratings are not as
effective in driving cortex for sustained periods of stimulation. Such
tonic decrease of activity has been referred to as slow contrast adaptation
during maintained presentation of a high contrast drifting gratings (Maffei
et al., 1973; Vautin and Berkley 1977; Movshon and Lennie, 1979; Ohzawa et
al., 1982, 1985; Solomon et al., 2004). It is thought to be either caused
by continuous hyperpolarization due to depression of excitatory synapses
(Carandini and Ferster, 1997), or by intrinsic membrane properties of
neurons (Wang et al., 2003) facing constant excitatory drive. In line with
neuronal data, prolonged exposure to grating stimuli results in a decreased
contrast sensitivity at the perceptual level (Blakemore and Campbell, 1969;
De Valois and De Valois 1980, Pestilli et al., 2008). In the light of our
results which suggest a prominent role for the inhibition specifically
during processing of natural stimuli, we here put forward the prediction
that the natural images may have much weaker impact on perceptual contrast
sensitivity when tested against gratings under same luminance contrast
conditions.

Adding context to the cortical machinery 

A fundamental property of cortical circuitries in early visual areas is the
ability of neurons to sense regions beyond their receptive field borders
(Fitzpatrick 2000). As a consequence center-surround interactions are
intrinsically tied to the integrative operationality of cortical function
(for review see Allman et al., 1985; Series et al., 2003; Albright and
Stoner, 2002). Its major characteristic is that isolated stimulation of
surrounding regions is not sufficient per se to drive cortical neurons
above firing thresholds, however strong modulatory effects on responses to
a stimulus presented centrally are exerted, to the point of effectively
changing tuning characteristics (Sillito et al., 1995). Previous
experiments demonstrated a variety of facilitatory and/or inhibitory
contextual effects but the final outcome crucially depends on the precise
configuration of the parametrized stimulus used to stimulate center and
surround regions. While the effect of surround was found to be mainly
inhibitory (Hubel and Wiesel, 1965; Maffei and Fiorentini, 1976; Jones et
al., 2001) and spatially asymmetrically organized (Walker et al., 1999), it
has been shown that the precise nature of the effect depends on the
contrast of contextual stimuli relative to the contrast threshold of the
recorded neuron (Toth et al., 1996; Sengpiel et al., 1997; Kapadia et al.,
1999). Although these neuronal phenomena are usually interpreted from the
view point of their benefits on naturally occurring visual tasks such as
contour forming, figure-ground  separation, object segmentation, perceptual
completion of occluded objects, it is not clear whether, and if so how,
these center-surround interactions studied with simple stimulus
configurations extrapolate to complex dynamic conditions that mimic natural
input.

	By using "keyhole-like" presentations of the original natural movies
	through either one or two distant Gaussian masks, we quantified the
	effect of surrounding stimulation on local activity levels. We provide
	evidence that contextual integrative mechanisms are indeed operative
	under natural stimulus conditions. The local movies evoked spatially
	confined activation spots with approximately circular shapes.
	Contextual stimulation led to higher activity levels within these
	regions compared to when the movies were shown in isolation. This
	facilitatory impact of the distant movie started within the first
	hundreds of milliseconds and lasted for nearly one second. The changes
	in activation levels were accompanied by reduced response latencies,
	most effective at cortical regions that were activated only little when
	single apertures were presented.

	There are three idealized mechanisms each based on different anatomical
	substrates which could mediate the observed facilitatory long-range
	interactions. Overlapping feed-forward thalamo-cortical input could be
	a trivial explanation for increased cortical drive during stimulation
	with adjacent movie patches. However there are a number of
	counter-arguments against this explanation. First, the pixels analyzed
	were separated by distances larger than the spread of direct
	thalamo-cortical projections (Humphrey et al., 1985; Bringuier et al.,
	1999). This is additionally supported by the fact that our latency
	measurements revealed spatially separated spots of equal response
	onsets for each movie patch, thus reflecting synchronous early thalamic
	input at two distinct cortical regions. Furthermore, the pixels
	included in our calculations were closely located around electrode
	penetrations sites which corresponded to receptive fields that were
	clearly offset in visual space. We therefore exclude a major direct
	feed-forward contribution to account for our results.

Rather, the dense network of unmyelinated intra-laminar horizontal
connections, linking distant neurons across several millimeters of cortical
space, is a potential substrate for the observed long-range effects. It has
been shown that neurons within early visual cortex of cats receive a
diversity of subthreshold input combinations (Monier et al., 2003). Since
we observed subthreshold cortical activity dynamics far beyond the
retinotopic representations of the individual movie patches, local activity
could therefore be influenced by horizontal lateral input. In addition,
feedback signals originating from higher visual areas with larger receptive
field sizes than in primary visual cortex could play another additionally
important role. In voltage-sensitive dye experiments back propagating waves
of activity have been shown to be initiated in further downstream cortical
areas as early as ~100 ms after stimulus onset (Roland et al., 2006; Xu et
al., 2007). Thus, these connections act fast (Lamme and Roelfsema, 2000;
Hupe et al. 2001) and are likely to mediate surround modulations spanning
considerable distances in visual space, while lateral intra-laminar
connectivity may account for modulations within shorter distances
(Angelucci et al., 2002).

Facilitation depends on spatio-temporal coherence

An important cornerstone of long-range facilitation is its dependence on
the precise spatial configuration of the surrounding context (Nelson and
Frost, 1985). It has been shown that facilitatory effects decrease with
decreasing congruency of the contextual stimuli with respect to the center
(Polat et al. 1998, Kapadia et al. 1995). Using static stimuli, such
coherency is generally controlled parametrically by changing the
orientation difference between center and surround patches (Levitt and
Lund, 1997; Polat et al., 1998; Sillito et al., 1995; Chisum et al., 2003).
Since our stimuli were dynamic and complex, to control the coherency of the
stimuli across two Gaussian apertures, we adapted a non-parametric method
by exploiting the unique spatio-temporal characteristics of each single
original movie. While the same movie was presented through both apertures
they were perceptually bound effortlessly and appeared as belonging to a
single scenery. On the other hand, the content within both apertures
appeared immediately incompatible when different movies were used instead
(see Supplemental Movie S1). There are a number of factors that determine
coherency. First, stimulus motion was very similar between the two distant
apertures. This was due to the fact that ego-motion of the recording cat
induced large and equal motion fields across the visual scene captured by
the camera. It has been earlier noted that such temporal phase
relationships across distant regions are perceptually salient and enable
object segmentation even in the absence of any spatial information (Lee and
Blake, 1999). Second, natural images tend to possess large spatial
correlations because of the dominance of low spatial frequencies in their
spectrum (Simoncelli and Olshausen, 2001). Moreover auto-correlations of
orientations may cover large portions of visual field reaching up to 8
degrees (Kayser et al., 2003).

We observed that coherent stimulation led to stronger facilitatory effects.
Since the total input across coherent and incoherent stimulation received
by recorded cortical area is constant, these results cannot be solely
explained by properties of local movie patches considered in isolation. It
necessarily reflects the outcome of an integrative phenomenon sensitive to
the content of both local movie patches simultaneously presented. Therefore
we suggest that the functional architecture of early visual cortical
circuits may have empirically internalized typical contextual relationships
of spatio-temporal natural visual features.

Supplemental Data

Movie S1: Example of Cat Recorded Natural Movies

Two different natural movies and derived local stimulation conditions are
shown as they were used during one of the experiments. To facilitate the
inspection, movies are shown at half of the speed (12 Hz) used during the
experiments. The right-hand color labels code (red/blue) for condition
identity. The monitor covered approximately a visual field of 30x40
degrees.

Movie S2: Voltage Sensitive Dye Imaging During Natural and Grating
Conditions

For a given experiment, the data recorded during full-field natural (rows 3
and 4) and square grating (rows 1 and 2) conditions is shown. The first
column shows the stimulus as it was shown during the experiment. Colored
rectangles indicate the position of neuronal receptive fields manually
mapped at each penetration site symbolized with color matching circle in
the second column. Evoked optical signals caused by these stimuli are
depicted in the second column. Please note that the color code has
different scales across different conditions. The third row depicts the
global time-course of activity that is the spatial average of the cortical
activation patterns shown in the second column. The data presented in the
last column represents the instantaneous stimulus speed. The scale bar
represents 1 mm.

Movie S3: Activation Patterns During Locally Presented Natural Images

Evoked optical activity during local stimulation with a single or a pair of
natural movie patches. First and third rows show full-field natural movies
(left) and derived local conditions schematically. Second and fourth rows
depict cortical activity patterns measured with VSDI. The scale bar
represents 1 mm.

Experimental Procedures

